Has there ever been like a Nobel
laureate whose own reputation can feel
so wobbly,
>> uncertain, debated given the stature of
the work?
>> 100%.
>> I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
today. Take a look. It's in a book.
>> Book covers. They're funny things. Maybe
you can't judge a whole book by one, but
let me tell you, sometimes a cover will
seduce you to the book and intrigue you
enough to pick it up and read it. I
remember seeing a paperback of Tony
Morrison's Beloved when I was maybe 12
or 13 and it had a woman on the cover
[music] and a lacy dress and a boater
hat and she was translucent like her
brown skin. You could kind of see
through it. This was the same book that
my mother and my aunts were talking
about. And I remember my aunt Katie
telling me I wasn't ready for it. But
that cover made me want to know why. So
I finally opened it and eventually I got
it. I understood it's a [laughter] it's
a hard book
like James Joyce hard like William
Faulner hard emotionally too because
eventually I realized that the woman on
the cover of that paperback is a version
of the adult ghost who comes back to
haunt the mother who chose to murder her
as an infant rather than let a slave
catcher take her away. The best thing
she was was her children. Whites might
dirty her all right, but not her best
thing.
>> That's when I also realized an Katie was
really, really right. I was not ready.
But that's the thing about Tony
Morrison. Nobody's ready. She writes big
and dark and bold humorously about black
Americans and their lives, their inner
lives. And I've spent my entire writing
life
trying to make sure that the white gaze
was not the dominant one [music] in any
of my books.
>> You just have to be willing. And 7 years
after her death, it looks like we're
even more willing than we might have
been before it. There's a whole raft of
Morrison hitting bookstores right now.
Her 11 novels have just been reissued
with new introductions from writers like
Tyari Jones and Jasmine Ward and
Jacqueline Woodson and Raymond Leilani.
There's a thrilling new book of
criticism about those novels and a few
other things about Tony Morrison by
Namwali Serpel called On Morrison. And
yet with all this new Tony Morrison to
lose or I would say find ourselves in
some people, some institutions who
aren't ready [music] for her work would
sooner ban her than read her. Beloved's
been banned. The Bluest Eyes has been
[music] banned. That is how dangerously
this woman wrote. That is the kind of
power the stories have. We all know it.
But in trying to defend her legacy as
some of these reissues aim to do,
something else is happening. Something
that both my colleague Parl Seel and I
have noticed. And we wanted to talk
about that with our editor Sasha Weiss.
Oh, we had this conversation the day
after what [music] would have been Tony
Morrison's 95th birthday. So, happy
birthday, Miss Morrison.
Carl, Sasha, you're back.
>> I'm so happy.
>> We're so happy. Well, I'll speak for
myself. I'm so No, no, speak for me.
Thank you. Thank you for [laughter]
having me.
>> Thanks for being here. Uh, all right.
So, our our job here today is to just
like really spend some time thinking
about Tony Morrison. And the very
obvious thing to do is to just situate
ourselves in our relationship. I would
say our
>> the primal scene of our [clears throat]
relationship to this woman who would you
know she'd really understand where we
were coming from. We talked about the
primal scene
>> of our of our relationship like when was
the moment that
>> not even that she but that she came into
your life where you were aware that
there was this person called Tony
Morrison and the words
entered you. Mhm. Mhm.
>> I brought evidence. [laughter]
>> So, I'm here with this is the evidence.
>> We were wondering about this special
book.
>> This is my copy of The Bluest Eye that I
stole from my middle school library.
But, as you notice, I've ripped the
cover off.
>> And I ripped the cover off because um if
you're familiar with the story of The
Bluest Eye, it's the story of a little
girl who is taught to hate herself.
She's told that she's ugly. She's told
that she is too black. She's told that
she's too um shriveled and small and
just loathsome and she prays for blue
eyes, you know. Um she prays essentially
for safety. She prays for love.
>> And there was a cover that featured a
little black girl holding a doll with
blonde hair. And I remember seeing it
and feeling so like just skinned,
>> you know? I didn't know when I just
moved back. I'd moved to America, back
from India. And I didn't know that other
people knew about this,
>> that you could be taught
>> to hate yourself.
>> Right. Right.
>> It felt like a secret.
>> And I didn't want my white classmates to
know.
>> So I used to in the library turn the
book around.
>> So So the cover wouldn't be visible.
>> And then finally, I just got so rattled.
I I took the cover off, took the back
cover off, and I took it home. I didn't
read her, but I just knew that there was
something happening here. And one day,
>> you hadn't actually read it yet. I just
knew.
>> You knew there was something there.
>> There was something there. And I just
felt that this was something. It was
people were being led into something
that I
>> was thinking about, unsettled by. I
didn't want them to know. And I myself
didn't want to know just yet.
>> So,
>> which is a really apt way into Tony
Morrison,
>> isn't it?
>> Knowing that there's something that you
don't want to know about yourself.
>> Yes.
>> That you are being invited to touch,
which is kind of what she does for us.
>> That's exactly what she does. But my
actual experience reading it was picking
up Again, I was twirling the carousels
and one day and I picked up Beloved
>> and I just read those first two
sentences and I think you and I talked
about this after she died.
>> Um, just I'd never seen sentences like
that. And those first two lines are 124
was spiteful period full of a baby's
venom. I'd never seen sentences split in
that way in these little phrases.
>> Well, I mean, my copy of Jazz, I can
remember I worked at a movie theater and
I would ride the subway home and I was
reading jazz. jazz was new.
>> But like the first word on the first
page with the the drop cap makes that
it's an S, but it looks like it could be
a five. [snorts]
>> And it's the word is
>> that's the first word a jazz.
>> Yeah.
>> A sucked tooth. But I was like, fifth, I
know that woman.
>> Who is fifth? I know that woman. Fifth,
I know that. And I said it over and over
and over again. And about the 27th time
I said it,
>> I said the fifth.
>> Oh, it's it's
>> she's sucking her teeth.
>> And then I kept reading the book. But I
understood.
>> But also that same thing like you can do
that. You can start you can start a book
like this. I did not know. I did not
know. All her books have these great I
mean great opening lines. They shot the
white girl first. M
>> the first sentence of paradise.
>> What about you, Sasha?
>> I don't have a powerful origin story
with Tony Morrison. I mean, but I what I
relate to in both of your stories is
like this immediate recognition that
something new was going on with language
and I think I read Song of Solomon in
high school and I think it was part of
an awakening to literature. I think it
was it was what part of what made me a
reader and recognizing that there's all
this new stuff you could do with
language. So, I know she inculcated me
into that, but I don't have this like
>> zap of a memory that you have.
>> But let's like fast forward. Let's fast
forward to now,
seven years after she died. We're kind
of re-enountering her, all of us, as
grown people. And the culture, not that
she's ever left, but you know, she's
being her legacy is being shored up,
right? people are writing books. Her own
books are being reissued. And I think
all of us sense and and you know, you've
sensed, Carl, that something's
[clears throat] happening here that
feels a little risky or unsettling. And
it has to do with Tony Morrison becoming
a saint.
>> And I want to know kind of what what you
see happening and why it feels a little
bit risky to you.
>> I mean, I should say that there are few
people who deserve canonization more
than Tony Morrison. [laughter] You know
it's one of it's one of those things
where you know have we ever is has there
ever been like a Nobel laureate whose
own reputation can feel so wobbly right?
>> Yeah. You mean un unertain
>> debated
>> given given the stature of the work the
eminence of the quality of the work
>> 100%. like she still in some way feels
like she needs defending in some way
that I I think we'll we'll talk about
but no I think right now 11 of her books
are being reissued and they've been
given these new introductions and
there's just a whole lot of personal
writing about just in the way that we
are like what she meant what she did for
people what she did to the language and
so much of this feels important in the
sense that just her influence in the
culture and for other novelists feels
just exciting to see right what she's
done for language, what she's done for
so many different kinds of thinking. But
what always makes me a little bit
nervous, right, is when somebody is
canonized and sanctified and
somehow becomes flattened in the
process, you know, becomes somewhat of
an eminent figure and we cannot work
with the ideas, you know, and we
specifically can't work with the ideas
that feel difficult, hot to touch,
complicated, that beveled even her. And
so I think because so many of the
questions that we're still asking about
witness, about repair, about when is
violence important in a narrative, when
is it cheap spectacle, right? What do we
owe the dead? All of these things are
just so alive and and I don't know if
there's anybody who's thought about them
or felt them or created language to
address them in the way that she has. So
I just feel like I'm not ready for her
to be untouchable yet, you know. Um, I
still want to wrestle and I still want
to disagree with her, you know, and I
still want to in many ways understand
what she's done to my own thinking. You
know, the fact that I can think at all I
think is oh I owe a lot to Tony
Morrison. You know, I'm going to talk
about her writing in ways that she's
taught me to think about writing that I
didn't know was possible.
>> Same here.
>> I guess I want to be clearer about,
[clears throat]
>> you know, have we have readers forgotten
that? Like what what is the
sanctification? How is it happening?
Does it mean that people actually aren't
reading her? Are they reading her wrong?
>> That's a great question.
>> Like what what what is happening? What
do you see happening that feels
like it's missing something? I think
what I I'm trying to be so charitable.
[laughter]
>> No, but I I just I think I'm trying to
trying to understand why. Okay, as a
prelude, let me just say this. Like
there's there few writers for whom
critics mattered more to than Tony
Morrison. She was obsessed with the
reviews she got. She read everything.
She wanted good critics, you know, and
she wanted critics, as she said, who
could see her in her entire cosmology.
She wanted black critics.
>> Cosmology is a great word.
>> Her word, not mine, you know, and and
she'd always said that if we want better
books, we need better critics. And I've
been trying to understand why so much of
the criticism
of Morrison and so many of these
eulogies feel so hollow to me. I can't
find her in them, you know? And I think
what I'm finding is that little pesky
pronoun that pops up right away. I I I
you know I feel the reader need you know
I feel what she does for people and it's
so powerful as we began our conversation
it's so immense what she does
>> but somehow in this the reader need
it sort of is starting to supplant her
achievement
>> what she wanted to do and what was
specific and spiky and scary
>> about what she was trying to do and she
always said that she enjoyed the danger
of writing the most
>> and so what is that danger, you know, I
I want to sort of have something I can
hold on to a little bit more, something
I can
>> I I can touch, you know, and and
continue to work with. And I think that
some of the the aireriness, some of the
the romance, the love, all of this puts
her out of reach, you know, and clouds
her specific work and thought in a way
that I find just very very almost
intolerable.
>> Yeah. I wonder if she's uniquely hard to
read and to talk about for some reason,
you know? I like I wonder why people go
to the eye because there's something I
mean I I do think it has something to do
with what she asks us to confront which
is often
>> danger in ourselves and and the thing
exactly as you said before the thing we
actually don't want to look at she's
asking us to look at and maybe even if
you've done it and you're a good reader
of her there's something difficult about
going back.
>> All right. At the risk of being glib, I
I would like to touch some danger and
read from it. So, I brought my family
edition of Tar Baby. Can I just read
this one thing?
>> Let's get into it. Let's let's let's
read it. I mean, let's talk about it.
>> I don't know. This is like I mean, how
do I explain this? This is a novel
where two of the characters, a black
woman and a black man, are kind of
figuring out what to do with their
attraction to each other. He is, this
man has just shown up on this property
in the Caribbean. This white man and
woman own and operate because, you know,
it's this novel is set with an awareness
of a colonial past and on this Caribbean
island. And at some point this woman who
has essentially been put through school
at the Sorbal by these white people has,
you know, has worked as a fashion model.
She and this man who she thinks is
beneath her. He's like, you know, rough
and violent and gross and like
nword black with his dreadlocks and his
like
crudeness and like obvious sexual desire
confuses something in her about what she
wants. Anyway, he's very clear in his
attraction to her and she
doesn't not want that. She just is
there's a class barrier operating in her
that keeps her often. But she one of
their encounters leaves her with this
memory.
He had jangled something in her that was
so repulsive, so awful. And he had
managed to make her feel that the thing
that repelled her was not in him, but in
her. That was why she was ashamed. He
was the one who smelled, rife, ripe. But
she was the one he wanted to smell, like
an animal, treating her like another
animal. And both of them must have
looked just like it in that room. One
dog sniffing the hind quarters of
another, and the female, her back to
him, not moving, but letting herself be
sniffed, letting him nuzzle her [__]
as the man had nuzzled hers. The [__]
never minding that the male never looked
her in the face or ran by her side or
that he had just come up out of nowhere,
smelled her ass
and stuck his penis in, humping and
jerking and grinding away while she
stood there bearing, actually bearing
his whole weight as he pummeled around
inside her, not even speaking or
barking. his eyes sliced and his mouth
open, dripping with saliva and other
dogs too, waiting, circling until the
engaged dog was through. And then they
would mount her, also in the street in
broad daylight, no less. Not even under
a tree or behind a bush, but right there
on Morgan Street in Baltimore with cars
running by and children playing and the
retired postman coming out of his house
in his undershirt shouting, "Get that
[__] out of here.
WE'RE DONE."
Because that was first of all one
sentence.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> It's ruthless. Ruthless.
>> But
>> it's so crazy to imagine her
above us. No, she's like
>> she in the street.
>> She's a street.
>> She's
>> I mean
>> all around us.
>> Yeah. I don't know. That was by the way.
Do you want to drag because [laughter]
that was I am high
just reading that. What's what's
>> it's it's amazing because like when we
read this right like it kind of takes
our our breath. It takes my breath away
again. You know, I've read that passage
so many times, but I I've never heard it
out loud. And I felt I felt such
conflicting feelings, right? You just
feel like what she writes about is just
forbidden. And how does she know these
things about people, right?
>> Wait, what do you mean?
>> Well, she just she knows how I mean, I
could I could read this from Song of
Solomon, right? is she she writes about
a married couple and how important their
mutual hatred of each other [laughter]
is
>> to keep them going that they both have
organized their lives around this quiet
strong hatred of the other. She just
knows where the sort of like shard of
ice lies in our hearts, you know, and
it's very interesting because you cannot
read her autobiographically, right?
She's not really interested in
>> thinking about, you know, herself and
putting her family on the page. puts,
you know, her her town on the page. But
there's one fact about her that I I
really love. Um her mother was a
brilliant musician and one of the jobs
she took was to was to play piano to
accompany silent movies.
>> And I kind of think about that's
Morrison, right? Like that's Morrison.
Like the notes
>> for the silent things, the quiet things,
the things that we haven't seen. She's
there. She's putting this music down and
giving us some kind of way to access it,
to hear it, to feel it. Um I don't know.
I mean, I still feel completely shocked
when I read something like The Bluest
Eye and she writes about sort of how
self-loathing is taught to children.
>> Mhm.
>> Um,
>> will you read something? Did you bring
something to me?
>> I did. I did bring something. Um, I
brought something that's very hard to
for me to read. Um, I think a passage,
this is a very famous scene in this book
in which a father rapes
>> Yes.
>> his 11-year-old daughter. And what makes
it so distinctive and so frightening is
that we're very much in his point of
view. Can I just say that I'm
>> filled with actual terror right now?
Like I feel terror entering my body,
>> which I think is a pretty particular
thing for a writer to elicit.
>> Like, and maybe this is what I meant
before. I think it's hard to encounter
her actually, even though we all love
doing it. Like there's a
>> I feel a hesitation in myself to hear
this even though I deeply want to. I'm
not going to read the actual scene. I
don't know if I can. I just want to read
you the scene where he's
>> the father Charlie is sitting. He's he's
a little drunk. And yeah, so it begins.
So it was on a Saturday afternoon in the
thin light of spring. He staggered home
reeling drunk and saw his daughter in
the kitchen. She was washing dishes, her
small back hunched over the sink.
Charlie saw her dimly and could not tell
what he saw or what he felt. Then he
became aware that he was uncomfortable.
Next, he felt the discomfort dissolve
into pleasure. The sequence of his
emotions was revulsion, guilt, pity,
then love. His revulsion was a reaction
to her young, helpless, hopeless
presence, her back hunched that way, her
head to the side as though crouching
from a permanent and unreieved blow. Why
did she have to look so whipped? She was
a child, unburdened. Why wasn't she
happy? The clear statement of her misery
was an accusation. He wanted to break
her neck, but tenderly. I'm not gonna
read more because it goes on and on and
on and it sort of she does this gesture
where she scratches the back of one leg
with her foot
>> and it reminds him
>> of the first time he saw her mother.
>> Yeah.
>> And
>> and then he goes to her and we're so
locked in his gaze and his lust and his
desire to give her some kind of gift and
at the same time his desire to punish
her. It's really the gift.
>> Very very
>> Can I see this for a second?
>> Yeah. 127. Charlie is
an amazing like it's an amazing um
the the daring here is to inhabit this
point of view obviously the point of
view of a of a man
>> but she also does the scene caps the
scene where we the entire sequence where
we've seen him from childhood on we love
him she's made us love him feel for him
want to protect him we've seen him
absolutely brutalized humiliated and
then this is what sort of crowns the
sequence.
>> Why do you think it's so important that
she's helped us to see him, love him,
be him? I think she wants, one of the
things that she wants in this book is to
say, what if this act is not just one
person's fault?
>> Mhm. Mhm.
>> Right. What if this was this
>> the whole community
>> was sort of in a way ordained,
>> you know, in a complicated way. I don't
think she wants to say it's just that.
She always wants to say yes, but you
know, she always wants it to be both
ways. Yes, he did this, but also how did
he get here? What happened? Um, and I
think also in some way the gaze turns on
us in a way that for example, no writing
Hbert Humber, it never really reflects
back onto us. I think she wants us to to
think about where our tenderness turns
to
um
>> ugliness.
>> Ugliness. Yeah. So interesting how in
both of the passages that you both read,
like revulsion and lust are mingled.
It's all there. It's all mingled
together. Um
>> show us your Morrison a little bit.
Where do you see this in her work?
>> Well, this [snorts] is also about
recognizing something in a hideousness.
Um,
I was I was really surprised to find
myself
moved
and I mean it sounds crazy and sick to
say it, but but but Morrison kind of
demands this and invites this to
identify with the explanation of a
mother who has killed her child.
>> This is from Sula. Um, and the character
is Eva, who's a kind of matriarch of a
dysfunctional family. horrible death.
>> A fearsome woman, um, an odd woman,
someone who's hard to read, and and she
kills her grown son by burning him in
his bed. And, and when she does it in
the narrative, it's it's not at all
clear why she's done it. It's it's
perplexing.
>> Um, and she does it and it's kind of not
commented upon. And then a little while
later, one of her other children, a
grown woman, comes to her and says,
>> "Why did you kill
>> Plum?"
>> Yeah.
>> And this is what Eva says.
And and I think this is really
important, the way that it's set up. So
Hannah was waiting for her explanation.
Hannah's the daughter. When Eva spoke at
last, it was with two voices, like two
people were talking at the same time,
saying the same thing, one fraction of a
second behind the other, which I think
is like a a bit of a key here, you know,
>> like you're a double of and I think when
you're a mother, you're you're you're
doubled in ways that are sometimes
really difficult to bear. So she says,
"He give me such a time. Such a time.
Look like he didn't even want to be
born, but he come on out. Boys is hard
to bear. You wouldn't know that, but
they is." It was just such a carrying on
to get him born and to keep him alive.
Just to keep his little heart beating
and his little old lungs cleared. And
looked like when he came back from that
war, he wanted to get back in. After all
that carrying on, just getting him out
and keeping him alive, he wanted to
crawl back in my womb. And well, I ain't
got the room no more. Even if he could
do it, there wasn't space for him in my
womb. And he was crawling back, being
helpless, and thinking baby thoughts and
dreaming baby dreams and messing up his
pants again and smiling all the time. I
had room enough in my heart, but not in
my womb. Not no more. I birthed him
once, I couldn't do it again. He was
Gro, a big old thing. God have mercy. I
couldn't birth him twice. I'd be laying
here at night and he'd be downstairs in
that room, but when I closed my eyes,
I'd see him. Six. This is the part that
really gets me. Six. And this is also
where revulsion and and and some kind of
lust or wanting mingle with with I mean
she's she's she's touching something
that's very hard to touch here. Six feet
tall and crawling up the stairs
quietlike so I wouldn't hear and opening
the door soft so I wouldn't hear and
he'd be creeping to the bed trying to
spread my legs trying to get back up in
my womb. He was a man girl a big old
grownup man. I didn't have that much
room. I kept on dreaming it dreaming it.
And I knowed it was true. One night it
wouldn't be no dream. It would be true
and I would have done it. Would have let
him if id had the room. But a big man
can't be a baby all wrapped up inside
his mama no more. He suffocate. I done
everything I could to make him leave me
and go on and live and be a man. But he
wouldn't. And I had to keep him out. So
I just thought of a way he could die
like a man. Not all scrunched up inside
my womb, but like a man.
[snorts]
It's such a complicated
set of thoughts and feelings. taboo
>> and taboo and and things that I don't
think most people have even plucked out
of themselves that do I feel this do I
feel like I'm being devoured by this
child's need do I feel
>> and also the suggestion here that
>> I mean there is a suggestion of some
kind of incestuous desire always you
know that that she also dreamed this
that this man came inside her and spread
her leg so there's some suggestion
>> not that she wants it but that that the
desire is hers too this ambivalence. I
want to mother him. I want to be
devoured,
>> but I also can't
>> I can't and and the limitation of that
and the and the revulsion at your own
limitation. And I and I don't know to me
all of those feelings are so
recognizable. And not to say that I, you
know, I don't think she's exactly asking
us to
>> condone it, but I think she is asking us
to kind of hold it. And I, you know, I
just, I was reading it late at night and
I just like, I mean, again, this almost
physical sensation of being um
electrified, inhabited, um something
done to me.
>> No. And just just the way that she can
write, the logic of it, right? Right.
So, I' I'd read Sula so many times and
the audiobook is wonderful because when
Morrison reads that part, she's kind of
like muttering to herself. I had room
enough in my heart, but not in my womb.
Not no more.
>> The way we muttered to ourselves and
we're cleaning and just saying, I can't.
This is this is not happening. Enough of
this.
>> I birthed him once. I couldn't do it
again. He was groed a big old thing. God
have mercy. I couldn't birth him twice.
this wonderful, wonderful sequence, but
I listened to it so many times and read
it so many times and never really
sort of absorbed the horror of it
because I was so on Eva's side.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, [laughter] it was only much
later than I realized that
>> she burnt that boy alive. And the way
that she can show you how this feeling
of helplessness moves into a place of
absolute maternal entitlement to take
that life is Yeah. I don't know. I don't
I don't I I there's so many moments in
these books where like nobody else has
taken me to this particular place. You
know,
>> I feel like
what's interesting here is
we've now among the three of us read
passages that involve
her thinking through
what black men are doing
>> to black women.
>> And
you know, one of the criticisms of her
from a class of
black male critic and scholar is that,
you know, she gets the Nobel Prize, you
know, the next day or maybe the same
day. Stanley Crouch is I don't know if
he was on Charlie Rose. I don't know if
he wrote an op-ed. Um, but he's
essentially decrying Belove all over
again. And he's, you know, he's famously
dismissed Beloved for being a blackface
Holocaust novel in a piece that he'd
written. But this was him essentially
saying that Beloved
is a terrible book in no in part because
it pushes black men off to the side. But
Charlie is interesting because I found
the passage in the book by the way that
I had been looking for. And it's
interesting to be thinking about these
men as carrying around some
some childhood injury or some like
underdeveloped aspect of themselves that
>> has been kept from fully forming and or
wanting to escape what awaits what it
means to be an adult man
>> in this country. you know, uh,
he knew if he was very still, he would
be all right. But then the trace of pain
edged his eyes, and he had to use
everything to send it away. If he was
very still, he thought, and kept his
eyes on one thing. The tears would not
come. So he sat in the dripping honey
sun, pulling every nerve and muscle into
service to stop the fall of water from
his eyes. While straining in this way,
focusing every
every urg of energy. Wow, Tony, thanks
for bringing that word back up. While
straining in this way, focusing every
urg of energy on his eyes, his bowels
suddenly opened up. Before he could
realize what he knew, liquid stools were
running down his legs
>> and the mouth of the alley where his
father was.
on an orange crate in the sun on a
street full of grown men and women. He
had soiled himself like a baby.
[laughter]
>> I mean, this is not even the thing that
I meant to read, by the way. That was an
accident. There's a whole other par
passage about
the negation of him.
>> Yeah.
>> The like the accident of him.
>> Yeah. And there's so many people in her
novels who are like walking living
abortions.
>> People who weren't supposed to be. Yeah.
>> Who even in being aren't
>> um
>> there's a very black thing about this
book
>> is
being born and wow
being born but not being real. Mhm.
>> Not forget invisibility
>> like just not even existing
>> because at least a invisible person is
visible to himself.
>> A lot of these men don't want to be in
the place that they are
>> like nostalgia for Plum is [laughter]
is being unborn. He is nostalgic for a
time in which he isn't even human yet.
Mhm. [snorts]
>> And I mean, you know, an unsophisticated
reader might read this and say, "Well,
Tony doesn't like black men."
>> That is that is very not true. I mean,
>> there's almost nobody who understands
>> a woman of two black sons.
>> Yeah. [snorts]
>> She really understands what it is like
to
send these people out into the world.
and Plum is probably better off burnt up
than waiting for whatever
in the world of this book awaits him.
>> But I do think that there's an
indictment
very frequently in our books. Right. I
think you're right to say that that
there there's a certain kind of way that
we see men who are stuck in some way,
frozen in some way, right? And there's
an indictment of society. There's an
indictment of culture. But there's also
again and again an indictment of
specific mothers,
>> right?
>> Yeah. It's not a system. It's not just a
system.
>> It's always both. It's always both. It's
the It's the mother in Song of Solomon
who will not stop breastfeeding [snorts]
her son
>> because that is the one satisfaction she
has in her life and then one day
somebody peaks and sees that his legs
are trailing on the floor and she has to
let him go. Right. Milkman's mother. or
it's it's it's pl it's Eva in the book,
right, who also looks after all of these
um urchins, these little boys, and she
gives them all the same name, the
Dewies, right? And they never grow up
either,
>> right? So, we see also
>> this complicated family psychological
unit of what is actually happening, who
is allowed to grow, who is kept small,
why and how, and for whose sometimes
pleasure,
>> right? [snorts] For whose use. So, it's
always this swiveing motion in her books
that are looking out into the culture
and looking very very deep into um this
notion of for somebody to feel big,
someone else has to feel small. There's
this phrase that um you've talked about
that Tony Morrison loved, which is
thinking the unthinkable.
>> I love that phrase and and I think
>> it is what she invites us to do.
>> Yeah.
>> It's also hard. Yeah,
>> to do it. But I Yeah, I wanted you to
talk about that phrase and
>> what you think she meant by it.
>> She never clarified helpfully, but she
often talked about it. She said, "This
is what I want to do." And in writers
that she loved, she would say the same
thing that we're all kind of saying,
"How did she know this? How did she put
language to this?"
>> Um,
>> and I think very simply when she or my
sense of it is that she's very
interested in what the mind cannot
absorb for whatever complicated reasons.
So one it might be what the mind can't
absorb because the suffering or pain is
too large or too obscene. Right? So
these are scenes in Beloved that we see
Seth's mind cannot actually
remember access a memory like a tableau
but she can hold on a corner. She can
remember the way that the trees looked
or she can remember the way that the
tombstone looked, right? Because to see
it all happening would just destroy her.
It would annihilate her. we see a
variety of ways and a variety of things
that different characters have of coping
with what their minds cannot hold and in
some ways each book is built around um
what these characters are avoiding
looking at and what to they're pushed to
discover usually right there's a sense
in her in her books that I feel that one
mind can't hold it but a few minds
together might a friend will right Paul
D says go think about it I've got your
leg go as deep as you want to go I've
got your I've got you by
So there's that feeling in her that
>> one mind will break if it tries to look
at it straight but several minds
together or a mind's coming together and
looking at it through a kind of story
through this kind of apparatus it can be
seen. She has invented another way of
looking at
the human condition. And no one had ever
really
[sighs]
applied
the sort of principles of literary
theory in practice to fictional
characters who've come out of American
enslavement
and
how do you
embody
disembbody
that experience?
in a way that doesn't totalize it,
>> keeps it particular to a to one person's
experience.
>> I think this is what's so powerful in
her work and why it gets so contested is
that she talks about memory as this
incredibly political act. You know, she
was the first, right? I feel like in
book after book to say that it's no
small thing when you remember and pass
on these stories. What happens? I think
where we've arrived is the quest is this
question of with Tony Morrison what we
do with her dead and with
these books living on and the person
manages to like sail into some new zone
where she can't be reached anymore and
begins to serve a very kind of almost
religious or holy function. And maybe we
we we pause for a minute on the desire
to do that or the impulse to do that and
what it where it comes from.
>> I understand that too.
>> I mean [laughter] because it's
complicated because on the one hand I
think that after
starting to plum some of these texts
like one of the feelings I experienced
in addition to horror,
>> um pain,
>> exhaustion, um passion was awe, right? I
mean, awe is part of what you feel
before this monumental
>> artist. So, it so I think there's some
kind of genuine sense of awe
>> that that that is part of it.
>> But then I think it also maybe comes
from a kind of protective impulse.
>> Um,
>> partly. Yeah, I think so.
>> Yeah. I mean, which I think like you've
told me that you kind of understand.
>> Um,
>> I do.
>> And feel even. I mean, I think we would
all I mean, I I think we've been talking
about this person possibly still being
underrated, [laughter]
>> which is insane.
>> But it,
you know, I think that just thinking
about how saints become saints,
>> right? like what it what it is what
saintthood really is is a bunch of I
mean with all due respect to like you
know how this happens it's a bunch of
people getting together and being like
this person has suffered greatly roasted
on a spit saint this person fgged in the
streets by the entire community saint
>> like there's so much death and violence
and you know dismember temperament that
makes some people candidates for
saintthood. You suffer. [laughter]
You were made to suffer in this in this
in you know in the sort of canonical
understanding of how this process works.
And
>> I think you're you're helping me
understand something, right? Because you
said that um you know what happens
before someone is canonized? Some act of
great suffering, right? Some kind of
sacrifice happens.
>> I'm trying to think
>> being sacrificed.
>> Being sacrificed, right? And I'm trying
to think of like what what was it for
Morrison? Like what how and I do think
that, you know,
I think it has to do with Beloved. I
think that if you don't have Beloved,
you have a set of intricate, beautiful,
sharp, sort of generation defining
novels, but the suffering in Beloved and
the way that she found a language for
it, right? And the way that, you know,
you you you brought up the Stanley
Crouch criticism, right, that she sort
of pushed black men's suffering to the
side in that novel.
He's not wrong. One of the things that
she did where she said that book came
from was thinking about Frederick
Douglas. And she said that Frederick
Douglas could talk about so many
different kinds of suffering. He could
not talk about sexual exploitation and
the rape of women. It was like there was
a veil there,
>> right? And she wanted to push aside that
veil,
>> you know, and she wanted to find a
language for up until that book. it
really was not written about, talked
about, discussed, you know, with a kind
of interest and importance and mourning,
you know, what happened to women? What
did women bear
>> during child slavery?
>> And
>> I think there's a way that she writes
about
writes about um the middle passage and
writes in the voice of of people on the
ships, right? and writes from the
perspective and and gets away with it in
a way that is incredibly difficult to
do. You know, she enters their point of
view. She finds a language for it. And I
do think in some way she becomes in a
complicated way. And I'm not sure I I'm
not sure I completely agree with it, but
I'm trying to think my way through this
point where I do think that there's
something about that book that felt like
it that she became a transmitter of this
history. Yes. in a way that feels
incredibly
>> well
>> in her own body almost. She became
something more than just a writer with
that particular book. It does not happen
without that book. So much to the point
that that book and Stanley Crouch says
that that book was a black Holocaust
novel,
>> black face,
>> black face Holocaust, which is insane
and insulting. But what's so interesting
about that book is how important that
book became to Holocaust scholars like
Mariana Hir. So many people use that
particular book to say, "How do we find
a language for memory that's being
transmitted in these interesting,
complicated, patchy ways? Why is it that
my child knows something that my
grandparents went through? What is
happening?" And they they draw again and
again on that book. So something I think
surrounding the mystery of its creation
and its power and its its success at at
speaking for some of the victims of the
most unspeakable crimes in history, I
think just kind of attaches to her in
this way. I think I think you're right
to identify Beloved as
>> the kind of hinge work in some way or
like the apotheiois of of the project or
>> just like the miracle in a way
something happens
>> and also thinking about
>> I mean I think this is what you're part
of what you're getting at that what what
actually happens to a person who does
this kind of channeling what did it what
did it cost her
>> what did it
>> what was her suffering. I mean,
>> I guess
>> and you know, and I and I think, you
know, what we're what we're talking
about in a funny way, I mean,
>> is the case for her saintthhood, right?
The ca the case for some kind of, you
know, kind of transhistorical energy
that she was able to
be a vessel for. I mean, there is
something kind of miraculous.
>> Convinced what's going on? Let's make
the case against any of us are quite
convinced.
>> I don't think it I don't I don't I'm not
not convinced. I just think that I think
that
[sighs and gasps]
what made her so prominent as a voice of
this experience was that she was the
first person to really try to achieve it
as a psychological condition that lives
in the present.
>> And I think that this question of like
what attitude to take towards some of
our unequivocal geniuses, right? if she
must be on a pedestal because she can
perform these functions for people. I
think that that is no one would object
to that, right? But one wants the ideas
to still live and work among us. Well, I
feel like we're doing the right thing
here, which is
>> actually reading her,
>> but also reading her communally and and
doing the the kind of communal act of
>> remembering that she calls for.
>> Yeah. I will say though, I know we're
dismounting here, but I mean, but there
is a caveat, right? Which is that, you
know, there are there are occasions for
that memory, for that remembering and
you know,
I don't know like some of this is
private work, right?
>> Some of this is intimate and you just
being alone with the text and Right. I
mean, look at look at look at this
>> look at this book that was that was that
was involved or or destroyed, you know,
for for the sake of privacy.
>> You're not selling tickets to watch
somebody.
>> Yeah.
>> But also, [clears throat] no one could
know. No one could know. No one could
know.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> My middle school is going to contact me
tomorrow. I know. [laughter]
>> Anyway, thanks for coming and talking
about Tony Morrison Parl and writing
that wonderful piece. Thank you.
>> You too, Essie. Thank you,
>> Sasha. Thank you. [laughter]
I'm stunned into silence by this
incredible conversation.
Before we go, I want to take a moment to
sing the praises of one of our great
actors, Delver Lindo. This person had a
difficult weekend and I was not going to
get into it because I don't want to sort
of traffic in this unpleasantness right
now cuz I'm in a good mood. But, you
know, in the spirit of Miss Tony
Morrison and speaking to difficulty and
ugliness to just say that it happened
instead of pretending that it didn't, I
just want to at least acknowledge that
he and Michael B. Jordan were called the
n-word from somewhere in the auditorium
at the BAFTA awards. And I'm like,
[music] you know what? These two guys
are having the year and a half of their
lives.
[laughter] Of course, somebody is going
to try to remind them that they don't
deserve it, even if it's by accident.
But the reason to bring it up is Del Roy
Lindo [laughter]
has been working for a long time as a
professional actor. He has never been to
this many award shows, I don't think, in
his life than he has been because of
Sinners.
>> Feels really good. Yeah. And one of the
award shows he's about to go to is the
Academy Awards where he has never been
as a nominee. It's about time.
>> See, white folks say they like the blues
just fine. They just don't like the
people who make it.
>> He plays Delta Slim in Ryan Cougler
Sinners.
>> Rice say he was going to take that money
going out to Little Rock starting him a
little church.
>> It's a wonderful performance. He's got
this extremely good monologue in a car
that one of the Michael B. Jordan is
driving in that movie.
>> Clan got a hold to him, searched his
pockets to found all that money. Made up
a story about him killing some white man
for it and raping that white man's white
>> and they lynch him right there in the
railroad station.
>> My question is what took y'all so long
academy voters, you had so many
opportunities to give this man a
nomination for something. Could have
been Krooklyn. Could have been Get
Shorty. I mean, he stole that movie and
everybody was trying to steal that
thing. West Indian, Archie, and Malcolm
X. I mean, money on the table. But maybe
my favorite Delory Lindo performances in
Clockers where he plays the neighborhood
drug dealer, Rodney.
>> How you always know when I'm coming out
of somewhere?
>> Don't you know I know everything?
>> He is doing monologues and cars all day
long. He's got at least two in that
movie that I remember. And in one of
them, he picks up Mai Feifer as he's
coming out of the hospital and
[laughter]
proceeds to be like,
>> "I heard the homicide came back on you
again yesterday."
>> Are you talking to the cops?
>> You and [__] buddies [music] now. What?
>> Come on, get in. Get in.
>> This is such a good performance because
at every moment, this man is sort of
balancing dualities. He's very cool and
calm, but he's also got to be a little
bit paranoid because, you know,
neighborhood drug dealer in 1995. Not an
easy job. I
>> mean, you happen to be a lowife rap
bastard [__] who would sell off
his newborn for suck [music] off that
glass dick. Crack will bring you right
on in the light. Del Roy Lindo is so
good at just like keeping it like this
and emanating
gravitas,
emanating danger. And that is something
that Delta Slim and Rodney have in
common besides giving really good
speeches in cars, which is they're
operating at a very very scintillating
room temperature.
>> I'm a great businessman Strike and I got
me the world's greatest product.
So I don't know what these people doing
these Oscars this year are planning but
I am almost praying that somebody
involved with this production is like we
have to expune expel exercise those
bafted demons for these two men. The
other person being of course Michael B.
Jordan. somebody is likely to find a way
to get these two on stage or just just
in the audience, just in the room to
applaud, exercise the racism away. I
mean, not all the racism cuz it is
Hollywood, but I'm here to remind us all
that Del Ry Lindo is having, I would
say, the month, two months, three
months, six months of his professional
life. And I am just happy to see Del Roy
Lindo
be an Academy Award nominee. I'm just
really excited for that. Dreams do come
true.